The surgeon general issued a report in
2023 declaring an epidemic of loneliness
in America. And one thing that was
surprising to me is that it was compared
in this report to the health effects of
smoking 15 cigarettes a day,
>> which is a lot of cigarettes a day. So
that's fascinating to me.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I mean it makes
sense because one of the things that we
know about um about loneliness is that
when people feel that feeling and it is
a feeling
um it it triggers the same part as if
we're feeling pain
>> of the brain. So it's like it it's like
we're under constant pain if we're in a
chronic state of loneliness.
This time on the art of accomplishment,
we're going to dive into loneliness.
There's a loneliness epidemic in this
country and in the world right now, and
why is that the case, and what can we do
about it? So, we're going to talk about
where loneliness comes from, how it
works and moves in our lives, and what
we can do to find deeper connection with
ourselves and with other people and feel
more connected whether we are in
solitude or surrounded by others.
>> So, let's make a distinction here and
just so we have semantics that we agree
on. There is loneliness which is an
emotion. I feel lonely and then there is
called isolation which means you're by
yourself.
>> Mhm. And being by yourself can be very
empowering. It doesn't particularly have
to be lonely. It can be actually an
invigorating thing. There's a whole
bunch of studies that show that it
increases your creativity and increases
has a lot of benefits. Makes you more
resilient
>> and um but that's because you're
choosing it.
>> So you might call that solitude, right?
>> Yeah, let's call it solitude. Yeah,
perfect.
>> So um so there's this feeling of
loneliness and then there's being alone
and they are very different things. M
>> one is an emotional state and one is oh
I'm choosing to be by myself and and and
for for our talk let's assume that the
solitude is a choice.
>> Yeah.
>> That the person's choosing it or at
least not resisting it. Not saying
there's something wrong with me because
I'm alone.
>> Mhm.
>> Loneliness is when you think like
there's something wrong with you.
>> And that's the big thing is that it has
this massive feeling of shame. The way I
have experienced loneliness is that
there is two things involved in it. One
is a component of shame like there's
something wrong with me. I'm not being
accepted. I'm not being loved. I'm not
cared about.
And that's my fault. Um and then the
other one is that often times there's an
anxiety of interaction with people or at
least
>> sometimes there's just one precipitates
the other. Right? You can feel lonely,
but you can still feel safe
>> in that loneliness because nobody else
is going to attack you. Nobody else is
going to reject you.
>> Yeah.
>> And so there's actually an addictive
quality to it as well. And one of the
cool things is people who have chronic
loneliness, and I don't mean cool as in
like this is a good thing, but cool as
in it's like a cool way to think about
it.
>> People who feel loneliness for a little
bit, they move towards connection.
There's it's a natural motivator for
connection, for
>> getting together with other people and
having deep meaningful relationships.
>> But if that loneliness is chronic, then
you start seeing the world as a threat.
In the loneliness, there's some sort of
shame, something's wrong with me. If
it's in the short period, it's an
amazing thing that moves you towards
others. And if it's in the long period,
then it can start isolating you further
and further and further and further. Now
for devil's advocate here, what about
the context or the situation where
someone's stranded on a desert island or
they're in solitary confinement and they
are through no choice of themselves
physically isolated and alone.
>> Maybe they don't feel shame like ah I
should be connecting more with the palm
trees and bugs around me or something.
Yeah.
>> But they just have the human need that
they're not getting met. How about that?
>> Yeah. So there's absolutely a human need
for connection. like we we have that and
we know there are tons of people most
most notably
uh different monastic um traditions that
people say oh I'm going to go isolate
myself for years at a time
>> but again they're in choice
>> right and so I think if a person I don't
I haven't seen any studies on it I
haven't been this person but my
assumption is that um if somebody is
isolated not by their choice
It's really about how they perceive it.
>> If they perceive it as, oh, this is an
opportunity, as a gift, I'm going to
make the most of it. It's not because
there's something wrong with me that I'm
here doing this thing. Then probably it
can be something that creates a lot of
growth. Because if you say, I'm choosing
this, I'm not resisting it, then there's
a whole bunch of evidence that shows
that. However, if you say, I'm in jail
because I'm bad.
>> I don't want to be here. or why is
everybody making me be here? Then you're
creating that internal isolation.
>> Or it's not fair that I'm stuck on this
desert island. That's a whole story that
might get in the way of the potential
for the adventure.
>> Exactly.
>> That one could take in themselves.
>> Yeah. But but I just say be careful of
that because what
>> some folks can do who are feeling that
loneliness, who are feeling that shame,
can say, "No, no, I'm just choosing to
be alone. I can choose to be alone."
>> Right? and and but they haven't actually
dealt with the underlying shame. So,
it's really not going to be a it's not
going to be a win for them. It's going
to be
>> avoidance.
>> Somebody could choose the monastic life
to say, "I'm going to go find myself in
the solitude when in reality they're
avoiding intimacy. Not the case for
everybody that's doing that, but that
could be a path
>> or or avoiding the shame that comes up
around other people or the anxiety that
comes up around other people."
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, where does this come from? What what
has us grow up with these different ways
of relating to being alone? And
>> well, there's the first one, which is
just genetically it makes total sense
that we like need to connect. We are a
social being. You know, we're like bees.
We're not like sharks.
>> And the fact that we are
born our our survival strategy
genetically is to be collaborative, to
be to cooperate, to work with one
another. And so and our safety is in
numbers, especially
whatever 200,000 years ago when we were
bone pickers, right? Like like we we had
we were not at the top of the food
chain. And so our job is to have that
social structure. And so
>> nature and its wisdom was like you are
going to feel pain if you are ostracized
from a group.
>> Yeah.
>> Because we need cohesion of this group
so that you can be effective and safe
and genetically prosper. So there's that
aspect of it. Then there's the aspect of
what makes it that
somebody feels lonely or has a higher
propensity to feel lonely. Um there's
some work and studies on uh insecure
attachment. Basically if you didn't feel
like you were securely attached then
you're more likely to be lonely. So
>> even if without the research it's pretty
obvious that
um if you are
in a house where you can't be yourself,
can't show yourself, where you aren't
seen because your parents are too busy,
they don't attend to you,
they punish you, they criticize you,
etc., etc., etc. As a kid, you're going
to take that on as shame. There's
something wrong with me. And maybe
you're going to even take it on as
anxiety, meaning there's nothing I can
do right. I can't interact with people
in the right way. That can also happen
in schooling or something like that. And
so you have this early experience of I
can't be seen. I can't be met
and I'm anxious around people. And so
you've learned this loop and you're just
playing this out over and over and over
and over again assuming that the world
is the way it was when you were being
raised. So typically that insecure
attachment style is what's creating that
loneliness and it's what allows people
to feel alone in a crowd
>> or alone all by themselves because
either way they're not being seen.
Either way
>> they believe that the world cannot
accept them as they are. Can't be seen
as they are. Can't be loved for who they
are. Can't be connected with that
there's something wrong with them if
they show their whole selves. And so
they're lonely.
>> Yeah. It sounds like that's that's a
clear component of it and it also sounds
like there's another piece here which is
just that over the course of the past
decades the structure of our society has
been shifting. There's social media. So
if you have any propensity to like
living in a loneliness pattern and
>> you're going to be drawn towards social
media forms of connection versus real
vulnerable scary intimate forms of
connection. And so when one's available
versus the other, you'll maybe lean
towards a little bit more this way. And
so over time, a lot of our society has
leaned into more surface level forms of
shallower connection. Yeah. That feel
like a surrogate to the real connection.
>> I would say it's a little more insidious
than that. So I would describe it not
about social media in particular, but
the more forms of avoidance that we
have.
>> Yeah. And the more that we move around
as a people, like we're constantly
moving and we don't have like that sense
of neighborhood or sense of family
that's nearby because we're chasing
opportunity. The more those two things
happen,
>> the more that our parents are
distracted, the more our parents feel
isolated, the less we're seen, the more
we feel isolated, the more we feel
lonely, the more we don't feel seen.
>> Yeah.
>> And the more connection is harder to
come by. It takes more and more risk to
get connected to a new neighbor than to
somebody you've known for 50 years. So
yes, it's like a a building effect in
society. Social media is the new form of
it. And interestingly, what social media
does
>> that a lot of the television did this
too, by the way,
>> is it gives you a surrogate of
connection.
>> It says, "Oh, I'm interacting. So part
of this thing is fulfilled, but I'm
actually not showing myself. I'm not
vulnerable."
Right? And so it's not giving you the
real connection that you that you need
to not feel lonely.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And so that's a lot of like when
you think about the connection course,
everything we're doing there is around
teaching you how to have that real
connection. And if you think about it
this way, if you think, okay, the
solution for loneliness is connection,
you can find it both in the connection
with somebody else and you can find it
in the connection with yourself. And
that's what the studies show. The
studies show that if you are choosing to
have alone time, you become more
self-reliant, you have better
self-esteem, you're more creative, all
those things. You're less lonely because
it means that you've learned how to
connect with yourself.
>> And so that also helps with the
loneliness connecting with other people.
So it's really far more about connection
than it is about whether you're with
somebody or not because you can be with
somebody,
>> feel completely disconnected, and you're
lonely as hell.
>> Yeah. Yeah. There's also the the aspect
of what we've been missing. You know, we
don't have a lot of the old rituals that
really built uh built a sense of
connection, the capacity for connection
and community as well as the rituals of
like coming of age that built the
capacity to be in in uh solitude.
>> Yeah.
>> And really explore and be with oneself
and then be able to go through
the span between both of those modes.
Yeah.
>> And navigate life in its full breadth. I
mean, the good news is those are all
available to us.
>> The the
bad news is that they're not automatic.
>> Yeah.
>> They're not just something that we like
we go through this ritual and it's just
what you do at this age. You know, the
only thing that's left like that is high
school and college. Maybe for some of
us,
>> gap year for Europeans,
>> right? Exactly. There's like endless
opportunity. I don't care if it's the
Renaissance fair or if it's AOA
community or if it's um religion or if
it's, you know, there's going to be
healthier ones or and less healthy ones,
but there are literally endless
opportunities. Just there's knitting
clubs. There's, you know, like it's like
really you can just pick anything. I'm
interested in pickle ball. I can find
community in pickle ball.
>> Yeah. So what's interesting is that that
community is there, but part of the
issue is that the community doesn't
solve it unless you connect with the
community. Unless there's a deep
intention to connect
>> and then and that somebody meets you
there,
>> right? Yeah. And that's the key
distinction because there are a lot of
communities that are organized around
something that's not connection, which
might be let's say we have a community
organized around
>> disparaging another group,
>> right? We have an organizer, we have a
community organized around playing a
victim to a certain dynamic. And so you
can have people to like and
complain with.
>> Yeah.
>> And that can be a certain level of
connection, intimacy, but it's a
different kind of connection intimacy
than if the group is actually
intentional about how do we connect with
each other and that's what we're going
for here
>> and ourselves more deeply. Yeah. That's
going to be the most fulfilling sense of
community
>> for sure.
>> Yeah. And then of course address
whatever we want to address in the world
with with that connection with ourselves
and each other.
>> To go back to your question about how we
how people get here and
>> the attachment what's interesting to me
is that most of the people who feel
deeply
you have that deep sense of loneliness
like not typically sometimes but like
maybe 80 90% of them are sweethearts.
>> I mean that's the crazy part right? So
if you think about the people who are
just like you said why they don't
particularly feel lonely typically like
it's such a strange thing they they
they're interacting they're connecting
with people they're asking for what they
want they're showing themselves this is
who I am and they're not bashed about it
and so they're far less likely to feel
lonely they have issues don't get me
wrong but loneliness isn't one of them
and so what's amazing to me is most of
the people who feel lonely they feel
like there's something wrong with them.
So, they're not connecting,
>> but they're really sweethearts,
>> which is like the most ridiculous thing.
It's like, what? Like, you're lonely,
but you're such a sweetie. Like, how on
earth do you think that you are
>> that there's something wrong with you?
>> Yeah.
>> Like, you clearly care. You clearly are
interested in other people. You clearly
like there's a wholesomeness to you that
a lot of people lack. And then and you
think you're the problem. That's just
>> dumbfounding to me how often that
occurs. I'm I'm literally jaw a gaped
often when I'm talking to somebody who's
lonely. I'm like ah like what?
>> Well, the former example you were
mentioning like somebody who's like
let's say like the the bully CEO type.
We've often talked about how that person
feels alone but they might not
self-identify as lonely and that's the
problem that I think I have and that I'm
like addressing.
>> Feeling alone and loneliness I'm going
to say are like different things.
Feeling alone is
>> oh nobody's here helping me. And it does
also come from a shame. But it's like
this moment of like nobody's here
helping me. I feel alone in this.
>> As compared to I feel lonely, which
means like I am not being seen, which
>> means you're not sharing yourself.
>> Right? That person who feels alone in a
crowd, it's like they're not sharing
themselves.
The person who's lonely all all in the
corner, they're not sharing themselves.
that that bully CEO, he might feel alone
in it, but he's sharing he's ra
they're just far less likely to feel
that loneliness.
>> Gotcha.
>> They feel alone in it. Don't get me
wrong. They feel like it's all up to me,
that kind of a feeling.
>> Yeah. It's an important distinction.
>> Yeah.
>> So, what what are ways that people can
work with loneliness? If if somebody's
listening to this and they're really
identifying with what what we're talking
about. Yeah.
>> And how how can they start right now?
>> Connection is the answer. Period. The
cool thing about connection is
connecting with others can start
changing that feeling of loneliness.
Connecting with yourself in an
intentional way, not to change yourself
can help with that feeling of
loneliness. Having somebody connect with
you helps with that loneliness. All of
those things can help with the
loneliness. And and so the way to get
there is the same way that we talk about
in the connection course, right? So
vulnerability is one of those things.
Um, it means that that thing that I'm
ashamed of, that I don't want to share,
that I'm not sharing about myself,
it's true and it's a little scary, but
I'm going to share it
>> and now I can be seen.
That's going to help cure the
loneliness.
>> Impartiality
meaning that I am not going to try to
change you. I'm not particularly saying
I'm wrong and I've got to fix myself.
It's like all that impartiality also
increases connection.
Right? If I am with you and I think I
have to be different, I'm extremely
partial about you or me and I want
everything to change, then I'm not in
connection with you, I'm increasing the
shame
and I am increasing my loneliness.
>> Same as if I'm walking into a group and
I'm expecting the group to be different
so that I get the thing that I want.
>> Exactly.
>> Without just sharing it vulnerably.
Yeah. But trying to manage and control
>> because when you're managing and trying
to control a group or yourself, you're
saying
>> I'm not good enough to be here the way
it is. They're not good enough to be
here. It's
>> some there's a lack of faith in
yourself. There's a which means there's
some level of shame. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> And so
so then also empathy and wonder are
other ways to really allow yourself to
connect. If I could just have that
sweetheart who's who thinks there's
something wrong with them, who's lonely,
just have enough wonder to say, "What
makes it that Joe thinks I'm a
sweetheart?" You know, just like enough
wonder to do that and they could see
themselves through my eyes for a moment
or through most of the people's eyes.
And you see this like in master class or
connection course all the time where
this person has an idea of themselves
and all of a sudden they like click and
they can see themselves through other
people's eyes and they're like, "Whoa."
Like the whole thing shifts,
>> which requires some empathy, which is
part of what we teach in there. And it
requires wonder of,
>> oh, wait, maybe I'm not looking at this
thing correctly.
>> Yeah. It's like one of the hooks in in
any movie about somebody who's lonely.
They don't see the sweetheart that they
are, but all of the viewers are just
like, "Oh, my heart goes out to you. I
relate. Oh, watch this movie to see how
this develops for you. I want to see it
work out."
>> Exactly. It's so true.
>> Yeah.
>> And so it's Yeah. It's just like it's
this cosmic joke typically and so so all
of it is oh how can I be myself let
myself be seen that is the thing
>> and the only thing that makes that
difficult is that I think there's
something wrong with me and that makes
me anxious
>> like someone's going to find out or
someone's not going to like me or
someone's going to you know attack me or
something like that because I've done
something wrong
>> or it's like just the shameridden I'm
bad and
everyone's going see it.
>> What about just the a sense of unsafety?
Like the world's not safe. Like there's
nothing wrong with me, but the world's
unsafe. How about that?
>> I My experience of that is that doesn't
particularly create loneliness. There's
plenty of people who feel like the world
is unsafe, who feel like a deep sense of
community.
>> I mean, I would say a lot of religious
structures are built that way.
>> The whole world's going to come to an
end. We're
>> but we have each other. I don't feel
lonely.
>> Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So I think that my
experience is that's that doesn't it's
not generalized fear. It's the fear that
there's something wrong with you or that
you you are going to get it because of
who you are essentially.
>> Something that makes you believe you
need to emotionally isolate.
>> Yeah.
>> And that it's your fault.
>> Yeah. Emotionally isolate and have the
deep thoughts
>> hidden. And the and the and the weird
part about it, the problem with this is
that because it's based on shame and
shame, if you've listened to the podcast
on it, is very stagnating.
Like, right, we talk about how shame
stagnates the emotional experience.
Loneliness becomes this thing where
people get kind of addicted to it,
right? I start to feel safe when I'm
alone. I don't have to feel that fear of
being ostracized. I don't have to look
at the part of myself that I don't think
is good if I'm just all by myself. like
I have less of that like thrown in my
face on a regular basis and so it's just
safe here to be alone
>> and then but I'm feeling lonely and and
so it creates that stag the same
stagnation that shame creates
everywhere.
>> Yeah. And so it's actually quite a
trick. And then since we know
neurologically after a while, then we
start really being skeptical, suspicious
of other folks, right? I I think about
whenever I think about that, I think
about
uh like there's this part of Highway 50
Nevada I love going to. It is Highway 50
Nevada is the loneliest road in the
world.
>> And and if you come across a wild horse
there,
holy crap, they're skittish.
But the more you go up the mountain
where there's less and less people, the
there's mountain ranges, the more
skittish the horses get.
>> And so there's this thing about like I'm
not used to people. I'm like I'm even
more suspicious, especially in the short
term is this thing that happens. And
it's it's
yeah, it's an amazing just just that
it's like so natural in any kind of
social animal that there's like a
suspicion starts growing when you're
isolated.
>> Mhm.
>> I They say that long-term loneliness
creates suspicion. I think it's just
long-term isolation.
>> Yeah.
>> That creates the suspicion because I've
seen that same suspicion happen with
people who become more and more
powerful. They're isolated and and and
they don't have that feeling of
loneliness, but there's like they are
isolating themselves more and more and
more.
>> Yeah. They can't be themselves. They'll
be taken advantage of,
>> etc. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Sounds a lot like the way that
static builds as you like walk across
carpet or like if you've ever stood on
top of like a power tower with like the
wires. Like the more you stand on it
when you're uh insulated from the
electricity until suddenly you touch
something metal, the longer you've been
isolated, the harder the shock.
>> And it sounds a little bit like that.
Like it builds up over time in
isolation. And then when you come back
into contact, you're going to have that
shock. So it also sounds like the path
back to connection is through the shock
through Yes.
>> feeling feeling the shock and walking
through the electric fence.
>> Yeah. When people are doing the
connection course, we call it like the
pucker, right? It's like, "Oh my gosh,
am I going to say that?"
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> It is that's the that's the thing that
builds and and as you start saying it,
then it becomes easier and easier and
easier to say. And you see this in
12step programs all the time.
>> Yeah.
>> The first time coming in, oh my gosh,
I'm an addict.
It's like a big shock. 10th time, 20th
time, four years later, you're like,
"Yeah, I'm an addict. We're all
addicts." Yeah. Okay. Like there's no
shame in it anymore. There's no shock in
it anymore. And the more you're doing
that, the less lonely you are because
the more you're being seen.
>> Yeah.
>> So then continuing on that metaphor, if
somebody is listening to this and
they're like, "Okay, I'm going to
practice or just lean into the
electrical shock in my life." How how
does somebody do that in a way that
doesn't say like over like blow out
their system or
>> take it too far or create a situation
that proves to them that they are
actually bad wrong should
>> that answer is a little bit different
for different folks right so back in the
back in the earlier part of the podcast
we talked about how some folks
they're alone in a crowd and some folks
are alone in isolation
>> right and so the alone in a crowd one
the shock talk is, "Oh my gosh, if I
show up, everybody's going to abandon
me.
>> I'm always going to be alone. I'm going
to be rejected. It's going to hurt." I
don't think it could ever hurt more than
the pain of actually being lonely. Very.
And and so
to me, it's just the way you go through
it is the same way you would go through
pain and exercise,
>> which is you take a little bit, you take
a little bit, you take a little bit, and
next thing you know, you're looking back
and you're like, "Wow, I can run 10
miles now." instead of five miles.
There's no rush in it, right? And and
the cool thing about it is that like one
deep moment of connection is better than
a whole bunch of not very high quality
connection.
>> So, you're just starting like how do I
get one what I feel like is a deep level
of connection for a couple minutes.
Great.
>> Mhm.
>> Then take a rest. Do what you got to do.
But, you know, you don't there's no rush
in this. It's just about, oh, can I
allow some of the connection? can like
how much can I let in and you'll know
when it's too much and just relax. You
have tomorrow, you have the next day to
do it.
>> So connection doesn't become a should.
Another thing driven by the shame
underneath your
>> lonely. You just can't be connected in a
should. Should is shame.
>> Yeah. That like doesn't work that way.
>> Yeah. And I'm curious how many people
who feel lonely are also constantly
feeling like, "Oh, I should go talk to
the girl or I should have said this or I
should
>> go out more,"
>> right?
>> And other people telling them that too,
perhaps
>> for the folks who are alone in a crowd,
>> you know, they usually thrive off of or
at least need that constant interaction
with other folks, right? And so it's a
similar thing as far as, you know, you
you create your dose, but it's about
opening up to the people you're around
just a little bit more. But I had a um I
had a client who was like that,
constantly busy, constantly had people
around them, but feeling very, very
lonely. And part of the reason that she
separated was that she was very
sensitive. She was successful
businesswoman, but she really could feel
everything. It's part of what made her
successful, but she really didn't want
to get overwhelmed. And it was an
amazing thing when she realized that
that sensitivity was a strength.
When she realized that she could choose
and she learned the skills of choosing
how to um like feel it or not feel it so
she could be sensitive or she could like
you know like limit that sensitivity
when she wanted to. The loneliness died
almost immediately. M
>> so on one level the question is
how like how much do you how much
connection do you take?
>> Yeah.
>> But the real thing is how do you connect
with your inherent goodness? How do you
see that what you think is a weakness or
is bad is strength?
>> How do you see the thing that you've
been saying is wrong with you isn't?
Because when you do that your capacity
to connect really jumps, really
increases.
>> Yeah. And that raises the question, how
much are you connecting with yourself in
your moments of solitude? Because if
you're not doing that and having that
side of the the balance,
>> right,
>> then
>> your time with other people will feel
more draining, you're going to have much
more social anxiety if you don't take
the time to recharge with yourself. And
if the time that you take isn't
recharging because you're telling
yourself you should be connecting or
there's something wrong with you and
that's why you're alone.
>> Yeah. or in deep avoidance meaning like
okay I'm going to scroll and I'm going
to call that being alone
>> right
>> right so the surrogates
>> can often really allow you to
and and sometimes they're like kind of
cool surrogates like dogs you know and
sometimes they're
not cool surrogates like social media
where we you know only get this perfect
image of people that we can never
compare to and so we can always see
what's wrong with us because we're not
shredded or we're not beautiful or we
don't have the private jet or whatever.
So, so there's different ways of being
in connection in your downtime when
you're solitude. And and that also can
be intense just like
>> So, it's really again, how do I gently
be in connection with myself?
>> Yeah.
>> When I'm alone, how do I feel recharged
when I'm alone?
>> Yeah. So for somebody who tends to feel
alone in groups but is in groups a lot
versus somebody who tends to be alone by
themselves but is in solitude a lot.
Yeah. There's some component of
>> Yeah.
>> try the thing that you're avoiding.
Absolutely.
>> And lean into the connection to self or
other available there. And also in the
one that you tend towards, how do you
how do you lean into the connection
available in that version?
>> Correct. That's Yeah, exactly. Do the
one you don't have the propensity to do.
lean in there and then figure out how to
be more connected in the one that you
tend to do.
>> That's exactly that's beautifully said.
The other thing that's really
interesting to me about it is that I
know that loneliness is a crazy
epidemic, but notice that we get
questions about so much stuff, right?
We're in master class right now. We're
getting like whatever three to seven
questions a day. People are working on
their deep stuff. And you'll notice that
loneliness very, very rarely comes up.
And I think we don't get it is because
it's there the shame of loneliness. The
thing about shame and the way it
stagnates is that you don't shine light
on it,
>> right? It's and it's it's amazing
because I'll watch somebody be needy as
hell
>> before they admit they're lonely. Right?
And admitting they're lonely isn't
annoying. Being needy can be very very
annoying. And so that's the other thing
that's that's true. And I know there's
some studies that support this, which
is, you know, we've all met that person
who is
looking for the mate and they're like, I
will find this person. I will find my
person and then I won't be lonely.
>> Right.
>> Right. And and
you also notice that like never works
out. And and I believe that the evidence
is that people who are doing that like
their their chances of having a secure
relationship have a much lesser chance
of happening.
>> Yeah. If your job in a relationship is
to make me not lonely, that's going to
be rough.
>> Or I have to do X, Y, and Z to not be
lonely.
>> Yeah.
>> Like if you look at the behavior of
somebody who's chasing the person so
that they're not going to be lonely,
they're constantly contorting themselves
to like, you know, did he do this? Did
she do that? D feels like crap in them.
It disconnects from them. And then the
other thing is they're not actually
showing themselves. So they can never
not be lonely,
right? Everybody I've ever met, is this
true? I think this is true. Holy crap.
Dozens and dozens of people I've worked
with on this.
None of them are just showing up and
saying, "This is who I am."
>> Yeah. And and the same for somebody who
feels lonely in a long-term
relationship. That seems to be this
absolutely case
>> anytime I've been in a long-term
relationship. And if I'm feeling lonely,
it's
>> always been because some part of me
doesn't feel like it can be expressed.
And then when that clears because I
bring it, then the loneliness goes away.
It might also change the relationship.
It might be difficult conversations, but
the loneliness is gone then.
>> Yeah. I mean, I'm just thinking about
the story that's happening right now in
MasterClass where somebody is saying to
their long-term girlfriend, this is
actually my truth
>> and like whatever is going to happen in
that relationship is unknown. But you
can clearly see they feel less lonely.
Yeah.
>> And they literally said like, "Oh, I
might lose the relationship, but I feel
good."
>> Yeah. So, for those people who who are
out there listening to this, maybe some
of them are the average adult who has
1.9 friends and tells 0.2 of them about
their loneliness.
>> Uh, what can they do? What what are some
We already talked about what they can do
in general, but I want to get more
concrete and specific like say an
experiment or Yeah. Yeah. a practice
that they can take away.
>> Yeah. So there there's literally
hundreds of them. You know, you can do
any of our workshops, you can do the
connection course, you can do just
download our free experiments page and
run almost any of the experiments there
that you think would make you feel more
connected to yourself. It's just all
about how do you feel more connected?
And so if you can write down, so this
would be the exercise I would give.
Write down 16 ways that you think might
bring you closer to connection with
other people and yourself. 16 for other
people, 16 for yourself. And just run
those experiments. Just try one each one
out. One for a week, the next one for a
week, the next one for a week. It's it's
just what are the iterations that I need
to do? What are the experiments I get to
run that will make me feel more
connected?
>> So it might just be as simple as
changing the way you meditate. It might
be expressing some scary thing every
day, something that's a little
vulnerable. It might be go to a 12step
program. It might be sign up for the
connection course. It might be sign up
for one of the free workshops. It might
be, you know, any literally anything
that makes you feel more connected.
>> If you're running experiments to prove
subconsciously the same thing, watch out
for that.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. So, right, run the
experiments and do it with with wonder.
And you can listen to our podcast on
experiments that talks about how to do
experiments. Thank you, Joe.
>> Pleasure, man. Good to hear you.
[Music]